Required content of Working Paper CLIO-INFRA

Please include the following elements into any working paper entered
into the CLIO-INFRA system:

1. Title

	Gender-equal inheritance by country and decade

2. Author(s)

	Sarah Carmichael, Selin Dilli and Auke Rijpma, Utrecht University

3. Production date

	2 September 2014

4. Version

	1

5. Variable group(s)

	Gender equality

6. Variable(s)

	Gender equal inheritance

7. Unit of analysis

	Country

8. Keywords (5)

	Gender equality, institutions

9. Abstract (200 words)

	Whether women have equal rights to inherit as men serves can serve as
an indication of their legal standing and general and is also and
important determinant of their economic position in itself, specifically
whether they are able to accumulate wealth. Inheritance practices of
ethnic groups from the Ethnographic Atlas were used to reconstruct
inheritance practices at the country level for c. 1920 and the World
Bank’s 50 Years of Women's Legal Rights was used for data on the
inheritance in 1960, 1980, and 2000.

10. Time period

	c.1920–2000

11. Geographical coverage

	Worldwide, selected countries.

12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing

	The data was extracted from the revised, electronic version of
Murdock’s (1969) Ethnographic Atlas (EA).  It is published by the
World Cultures journal:
<eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/worldcul/world.htm> and the raw data
itself is available at
<intersci.ss.uci.edu/wiki/pub/XC/EthnographicAtlasWCRevisedByWorldCultur
es.sav>. Bolt (2012) recoded all the ethnic group-level variables to the
country level (see Carmichael and Rijpma (2014) for more details). If
the majority of the population of a country practiced some form of
inheritance that gave women a stronger position than patrilineal
inheritance towards men did, it was coded as equal. This included
matrilineal (sister’s sons and other matrilineal heirs) and bilateral
(both schemes where daughters inherited completely equally or inherited
less). This wide definition of gender-equal inheritance has been used
because in 1920 patrilineal inheritance was still the norm. The data
from Hallward-Driemeier, Hasan, and Rusu (2013) considers the de jure
rights of daughters to inherit equally to sons.

13. Data quality

	The data from the EA is generally considered sufficient for Africa, but
coverage and the ethnographic bases for Eurasia and the Americas is
patchy and significant flaws have been uncovered for other variables in
the EA in these regions. See Carmichael and Rijpma (2014) for a test of
the Murdock data. For the data quality from 1960 onwards, see
Hallward-Driemeier, Hasan, and Rusu (2013).

14. Date of collection

	See references

15. Data collectors

	Auke Rijpma

16. Sources

	

Bolt, J. (2012), “A New Database on the Origins of Institutional
Development”, University of Groningen working paper.

Carmichael, S. and A. Rijpma (2014), “Testing Todd: Global Data on
Family Characteristics”,
http://vkc.library.uu.nl/vkc/seh/Lists/Events/
Attachments/33/carmichaelrijpma_testing.pdf.

Deere, Carmen Diana, Abena D. Oduro, Hema Swaminathan, and Cheryl Doss.
2013. “Property Rights and the Gender Distribution of Wealth in
Ecuador, Ghana and India.” The Journal of Economic Inequality 11 (2):
249–65. doi:10.1007/s10888-013-9241-z.

Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Tazeen Hasan, and Anca Bogdana Rusu. 2013.
“Women’s Legal Rights over 50 Years: Progress, Stagnation or
Regression?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, no. 6616. c.

 urdock, George Peter. 1969. Ethnographic Atlas. 2nd print. Pittsburg:
Univ. of Pittsburgh Press.

17. Text

	Whether women have equal rights to inherit as men serves can serve as
an indication of their legal standing and general and is also and
important determinant of their economic position in itself, specifically
whether they are able to accumulate wealth (Deere et al., 2013).
Inheritance practices of ethnic groups from the Ethnographic Atlas
(Murdock 1969; Carmichael and Rijpma 2014) were used to reconstruct
inheritance practices at the country level for c. 1920 and the World
Bank’s 50 Years of Women's Legal Rights was used for data on the
inheritance in 1960, 1980, and 2000.

(Hallward-Driemeier, Hasan, and Rusu 2013). 

	The data was extracted from the revised, electronic version of
Murdock’s (1969) Ethnographic Atlas.  It is published by the World
Cultures journal: <eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/worldcul/world.htm> and
the raw data itself is available at
<intersci.ss.uci.edu/wiki/pub/XC/EthnographicAtlasWCRevisedByWorldCultur
es.sav>. Bolt (2012) recoded all the ethnic group-level variables to the
country level (see Carmichael and Rijpma (2014) for more details). If
the majority of the population of a country practiced some form of
inheritance that gave women a stronger position than patrilineal
inheritance towards men did, it was coded as equal. This included
matrilineal (sister’s sons and other matrilineal heirs) and bilateral
(both schemes where daughters inherited completely equally or inherited
less). This wide definition of gender-equal inheritance has been used
because in 1920 patrilineal inheritance was still the norm. The data
from Hallward-Driemeier, Hasan, and Rusu (2013) considers the de jure
rights of daughters to inherit equally to sons.

