Required content of Working Paper CLIO-INFRA

Please include the following elements into any working paper entered
into the CLIO-INFRA system:

1. Title

	Biodiversity changes by decade and country

2. Author(s)

	Kees Klein Goldewijk, Utrecht University

3. Production date

	2013-6-24.

4. Version

	1

5. Variable group(s)

	Environmental sustainability

6. Variable(s)

	MSA (Mean Species Abundance)

7. Unit of analysis

	Country

8. Keywords (5)

	MSA, biodiversity, land use change, cropland , pasture expansion

9. Abstract (200 words)

MSA

10. Time period

	1500 -2000

11. Geographical coverage

	Worldwide

12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing

This dataset is based on the GLOBIO3 approach, represented by the Mean
Species Abundance (MSA) indicator. Due to historical data availability
only a selective set of pressures (cropland and grazing) is included
here. This dataset  therefore gives an overestimation of remaining
biodiversity or naturalness, as compared to other studies in which the
GLOBIO approach was used for the more recent time periods, e.g.
Environmental Data Compendium (  HYPERLINK
"http://www.compendiumvoordeleefomgeving.nl/" 
http://www.compendiumvoordeleefomgeving.nl/ ) and the Global
Biodiversity Outlook4 (  HYPERLINK "https://www.cbd.int/gbo4/" 
https://www.cbd.int/gbo4/ . GLOBIO3 is built on a set of equations
linking environmental drivers and biodiversity impact (cause–effect
relationships). Cause–effect relationships are derived from available
literature using meta-analyses. GLOBIO3 describes biodiversity as the
remaining mean species abundance (MSA) of original species, relative to
their abundance in pristine or primary vegetation, which are assumed to
be not disturbed by human activities for a prolonged period. MSA is
similar to the Biodiversity Integrity Index (Majer and Beeston 1996) and
the Biodiversity Intactness Index (Scholes and Biggs 2005) and can be
considered as a proxy for the CBD indicator on trends in species
abundance (UNEP 2004). The main difference between MSA and BII is that
every hectare is given equal weight in MSA, whereas BII gives more
weight to species rich areas. MSA is also similar to the Living Planet
Index (Loh and others 2005), which compares changes in populations to a
1970 baseline, rather than to primary vegetation. It should be
emphasized that MSA does not completely cover the complex biodiversity
concept, and complementary indicators should be included, when used in
extensive biodiversity assessments (Faith and others 2008). 

The output of GLOBIO is expressed here as MSA, an indicator of
naturalness or biodiversity intactness. It is defined as the mean
abundance of original species relative to their abundance in undisturbed
ecosystems. An area with an MSA of 100% means a biodiversity that is
similar to the natural situation. An MSA of 0% means a completely
destructed ecosystem, with no original species remaining. Global
environmental drivers of biodiversity change are input for GLOBIO3. In
this particular case, a simplified method is used since not all required
drivers are available for the historical period. Therefore, only
historical land use changes are the main driver here. Long term
historical expansion of cropland, pasture (land used for grazing
livestock, intensive and extensive) and built-up area (urban sprawl,
growth of cities and towns) are taken from the HYDE 3.1 database (Klein
Goldewijk et al. 2011). GLOBIO3 calculates the overall MSAi value by
substracting the individual MSAX maps from the potential maximum
available grid cell land area (and dividing with it so a fraction is
obtained): 

MSAi,t = (Gareai – 0.7* Croplandi,t – 0.3 *Pasturei,t – 0.95 *
Built-upi,t)/Gareai 

where i is a grid cell, t is (historical) time step, MSAi is the overall
value for grid cell i, Gareai is the total available land area of grid
cell i. Cropland, Pasture and Built-up are the corresponding historical
land use areas at time step t. The multipliers are derived from expert
judgment, indicating a very high negative impact on biodiversity (0.95),
a severe impact (0.7) and a modest impact (0.3).

13. Data quality

	-

14. Date of collection

	-

15. Data collectors

	HYDE database , GLOBIO project

16. Sources

	  HYPERLINK "http://www.globio.info/"  http://www.globio.info/ 

	

Alkemade R, van Oorschot M, Miles L, Nelleman C, Bakkenes M, ten Brink
(2009) GLOBIO3: A framework to investigate options for reducing global
terrestrial biodiverity loss, Ecosystems 12: 374-390.

http://  HYPERLINK "http://www.pbl.nl/hyde"  www.pbl.nl/hyde 

Klein Goldewijk, K. , A. Beusen, M. de Vos and G. van Drecht, 2011. The
HYDE 3.1 spatially explicit database of human induced land use change
over the past 12,000 years, Global Ecology and Biogeography 20(1):
73-86.   HYPERLINK
"http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00587.x/abs
tract"  DOI: 10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00587.x. 

