Required content of Working Paper CLIO-INFRA

Please include the following elements into any working paper entered
into the CLIO-INFRA system:

1. Title

	Ratio of girls to boys aged 0–5 by country and decade

2. Author(s)

	Sarah Carmichael, Selin Dilli and Auke Rijpma, Utrecht University

3. Production date

	20 August 2014

4. Version

	1

5. Variable group(s)

	Gender equality

6. Variable(s)

	Sex ratio

7. Unit of analysis

	Country

8. Keywords (5)

	Gender equality, demograpy

9. Abstract (200 words)

	Following Sen (1992), the ratio of girls to boys is used to assess
discrimination against women in the area of health. There should be a
fixed rate of male to female births in humans (about 5 % more boys than
girls). In some countries and regions, however, there are much more boys
then girls, which is often blamed on sex-selective abortion,
infanticide, and neglect in health and nutrition. We focus on the age
category 0–5 for two reasons. The first is that the three-fifth of
missing women go missing in the birth–childhood period. Secondly, the
phenomenon of missing girls at birth reflects discrimination in the
household, resulting from the combination of strong preferences for sons
combined with declining fertility and the spread of technologies
allowing parents to know the sex of the child before birth. Missing
girls/women at later stages of the life cycle reflect not only
discriminatory practices against women, but also issues of general
development, such as lack of healthcare, or infrastructure in terms of
water and sanitation (World Bank, 2011).

10. Time period

	1900–2009

11. Geographical coverage

	Worldwide, selected countries.

12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing

	Population distribution by gender from published census material were
used to reconstruct  the ratio of girls to boys aged 0–5 in each
country. Decadal averages for each country were taken.

13. Data quality

	Good after 1950 (based on official UN WPP 2013 statistics), before 1950
official government census data from Mitchell (2007) were used, but
misreporting might be an issue in the original censuses for countries
outside Europe and its offshoots.

14. Date of collection

	See references

15. Data collectors

	Auke Rijpma

16. Sources

	

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population
Division (2013), World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision, Key
Findings and Advance Tables,
http://esa.un.org/wpp/Excel-Data/population.htm.

Mitchell, B. R. (2007), International Historical Statistics, 6th ed.
Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, Hampshire, [etc.].

17. Text

Following Sen (1992), the ratio of girls to boys is used to assess
discrimination against women in the area of health. There should be a
fixed rate of male to female births in humans (about 5 % more boys than
girls). In some countries and regions, however, there are much more boys
then girls, which is often blamed on sex-selective abortion,
infanticide, and neglect in health and nutrition. We focus on the age
category 0–5 for two reasons. The first is that the three-fifth of
missing women go missing in the birth–childhood period. Secondly, the
phenomenon of missing girls at birth reflects discrimination in the
household, resulting from the combination of strong preferences for sons
combined with declining fertility and the spread of technologies
allowing parents to know the sex of the child before birth. Missing
girls/women at later stages of the life cycle reflect not only
discriminatory practices against women, but also issues of general
development, such as lack of healthcare, or infrastructure in terms of
water and sanitation (World Bank, 2011).

