Working Paper CLIO-INFRA: Total Cropland

1. Title

	Total cropland area by decade and country

2. Author(s)

	Kees Klein Goldewijk, Utrecht University

3. Production date

	2012-9-1.

4. Version

	1

5. Variable group(s)

	Environmental sustainability

6. Variable(s)

	Total cropland area

7. Unit of analysis

	Country

8. Keywords (5)

	Agriculture, cropland

9. Abstract (200 words)

Cropland occupied roughly less than 1% of the global ice-free land area
for a long time period until 1000 A.D., quite similar like the area used
for pasture. In the centuries that followed the share of global cropland
increased to 2% in 1700 A.D. (ca. 3 million km2), and 11% in 2000
A.D.(15 million km2), while the share of pasture area grew from 2% in
1700 A.D. to 24% in 2000 A.D. (34 million km2) These profound land use
changes have had, and will continue to have quite considerable
consequences for global biogeochemical cycles and subsequently global
climate change. 

Some researchers suggest that mankind has shifted from living in the
Holocene (~emergence of agriculture) into the Anthropocene (~humans
capable of changing the Earth’ atmosphere) since the start of the
Industrial Revolution. But in the light of the sheer size and magnitude
of some historical land use changes (e.g. as result of the depopulation
of Europe due to the Black Plague in the 14th century and the aftermath
of the colonization of the Americas in the 16th century), we believe
that this point might have occurred earlier in time. While there are
still many uncertainties and gaps in our knowledge about the importance
of land use (change) in the global biogeochemical cycle, we hope that
this database can help global (climate) change modelers to close parts
of this gap.

10. Time period

	1500 -2000

11. Geographical coverage

	Worldwide

12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing

Historical population, cropland and pasture statistics are combined with
satellite information and specific allocation algorithms (which change
over time) to create spatial explicit maps, which are fully consistent
on a 5 minute longitude/latitude grid resolution, and cover the period
10,000 B.C. to 2,000 A.D..

13. Data quality

	1960 – 2000 period: good

	Ca 1800-1960 period: fair for Europe and N. America, poor for the rest
of the world

	Pre-1800 period: rather poor, a few countries excepted

14. Date of collection

	-

15. Data collectors

	HYDE database 

16. Sources

	  HYPERLINK "http://www.pbl.nl/hyde"  www.pbl.nl/hyde 

	

Klein Goldewijk, K. , A. Beusen, M. de Vos and G. van Drecht, 2011. The
HYDE 3.1 spatially explicit database of human induced land use change
over the past 12,000 years, Global Ecology and Biogeography 20(1):
73-86.   HYPERLINK
"http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00587.x/abs
tract"  DOI: 10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00587.x. 

