Working Paper CLIO-INFRA: Cattle per Capita

1. Title

	Cattle per capita numbers by decade and country

2. Author(s)

	Kees Klein Goldewijk, Utrecht University

3. Production date

	2013-04-09

4. Version

	1

5. Variable group(s)

	Geography, Environment, and Sustainability

6. Variable(s)

	Cattle per capita

7. Unit of analysis

	Country

8. Keywords (5)

	Cattle, livestock

9. Abstract (200 words)

	Estimates of cattle per capita based on historical data combined with
modelling.

10. Time period

	1500 -2000

11. Geographical coverage

	Worldwide

12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing

Historical cattle statistics from Mitchell are first adjusted to match
the FAO statistics in 1961 (FAO presents statistics from 1961-present
time). Then, the most historical data found in Mitchell is converted in
a simple per-capita number, and this number is kept constant further
back in time. Apparently for Europe this will result in an underestimate
(evidence from Broadberry et al suggest that in Medieval times the per
capita cattle number was higher), but for other regions this is probably
not the case (Americas and Australia/New Zealand didn’t have livestock
at all until the early 16th century resp. late 18th century).

13. Data quality

	1960 – 2000 period: good

	Ca 1800-1960 period: fair for Europe and N. America, poor for the rest
of the world

	Pre-1800 period: rather poor, a few countries excepted

14. Date of collection

	-

15. Data collectors

	HYDE database 

16. Sources

Capece, J.C., Campbell, K.L., Bohlen, P.J., Graetz, D.A., Portier, K.M.,
2007. Soil phosphorus, cattle stocking rates, and water quality in
subtropical pastures in Florida, USA. Rangeland Ecology and Managment
60, 19-30.

CBS, 2009. Bodemgebruik Nederland. Statistics Netherlands.

FAO, 2012a. FAOSTAT. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Rome, Italy (  HYPERLINK "http://www.fao.org)" 
http://www.fao.org) .

FAO, 2012b. Mongolia, Livestock in herding.   HYPERLINK
"http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Counprof/mongol1.htm" \l "Livestock"
 http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Counprof/mongol1.htm#Livestock .

Federico, G., 2005. Feeding the world, An economic history of
agriculture, 1800-2000. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Houtte, J.A., 1979. Economische geschiedenis van de Lage Landen 800 -
1800. Unieboek b.v., Bussum 270 pp.

Mitchell, B.R., 1993a. International Historical Statistics, Africa, Asia
& Oceania: 1750 - 1993, Third Ed. MacMillan, Indianapolis 1113 pp.

Mitchell, B.R., 1993b. International Historical Statistics, The
Americas: 1750 - 1988. MacMillan, Indianapolis 817 pp.

Mitchell, B.R., 1998. International Historical Statistics, Europe: 1750
- 1993, Fourth Ed. MacMillan, Indianapolis 817 pp.

Swedish Board of Agriculture, 2012. Table 1.12 Number of bovine animals
1805-2004. Swedish Board of Agriculture,   HYPERLINK
"http://www.sjv.se/webdav/files/SJV/Amnesomraden/Statistik,%20fakta/Anna
n%20statistik/Statistikrapport/20056/20056_tabeller12.htm" 
http://www.sjv.se/webdav/files/SJV/Amnesomraden/Statistik,%20fakta/Annan
%20statistik/Statistikrapport/20056/20056_tabeller12.htm .

Urquhart, M., Buckley, K., 1965. Historical statistics of Canada.
University Press.

US Bureau of Census, 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States,
Colonial Times to 1970, Bicentennial Edition ed. U.S. Department of
Commerce, Washington D.C.

US Bureau of Census, 1976. Land utilization in the USA, by type: 1890 to
1969 (in ha). U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington D.C.

Van Zanden, J.-L., 2009. The long road to the Industrial Revolution, the
european economy in a global perspective, 1000 - 1800, First ed. Brill,
Leiden, Boston 342 pp.

